On May 13, 2015, a fire broke out at the Kentex Manufacturing factory in Valenzuela, Philippines. Seventy-two people were killed in the fire. The incident is the third worst fire incident in Philippine history. The second incident was the Manor Hotel fire in Quezon City in 2001 which claimed 75 lives. The worst fire incident was the Ozone Disco Club fire of 1996.

On May 13, 2015, a fire broke out when welding sparks caused the ignition of chemicals being stored near the entrance of the Kentex Manufacturing factory.[3] It is possible, although unconfirmed, that the weld was being performed on the doors of one of the main entrances to the building.[4] A thick, black smoke engulfed the building as rubber and chemicals burned. The fire spread quickly and few people escaped. Unable to leave, trapped workers retreated to the second floor and attempted to call relatives for help.[3]

It took five hours for the fire department to get the blaze under control. The fire left the building unstable, causing a delay in the retrieval of the dead while engineers secured the building.[3] Kentex is a small manufacturer of flip flops and other rubber shoes located in Valenzuela City, a northern suburb of Manila, Philippines.[3][4] It is one of many similar businesses serving the local market in a poor area of town.[4]

At least 72 people were killed in the fire.[4] Most of the victims likely suffocated to death from the smoke.[3] Many bodies were badly burnt, being "reduced to skulls and bones" in some cases. Sixty-nine of the 72 bodies were found on the factory's second floor. The Barangay Maysan village hall was converted into a temporary morgue to store the dead.[4]

On May 14, the Valenzuela City fire chief, Mel Jose Lagan, and senior inspector, Ed-groover Oculam, were placed on administrative leave as authorities investigated possible wrong doing. Before the announcement, Lagan was adamant that local firefighters had not been negligent. He said the arson unit would look into how the workers became trapped, saying that there were sufficient exits to the building.[4]

Survivors of the blaze claimed the factory had sweatshop-like conditions and blamed the large loss of life on barred windows. The workers worked for "well below minimum wage" and endured foul smells, according to family of the victims and The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines. Pay was dependent on the number of shoes produced, creating wages as little as 300 pesos (US$6.70) in a 12-hour day (minimum wage is 481 pesos). Others said the company was not making required social security and health insurance payments. A survivor who escaped from the first floor remarked "They were screaming for help, holding on to the bars. When we could no longer see their hands, we knew they had died ... they died because they were trapped on the second floor."[4] Another survivor remarked "We were running not knowing exactly where to go ... if people had known what to do, it would have been different."[4]

The acting national police chief, Leonardo Espina, said "Someone will definitely be charged because of the deaths."[4] It was only a matter of determining who was negligent in the case. Interior Secretary Mar Roxas promised justice for the victims and said he was angered by the apparent cause (welding near flammable materials) and insufficient exits in the factory. The factory's workers had apparently received no safety training.[4]

A September 2014 government assessment found Kentex in compliance with safety requirements. According to the Department of Labor and Employment, the company had an established safety committee.